Once around Amalthea.
So, Amalthea or Amalthea, pronounce it
whichever you like,
can be described as Jupiter number five,
Jupiter V, the Roman numeral for five
there.
Galileo, of course, turned his telescope
to Jupiter in 1610 and found the big
four, the
four large, almost planet-sized moons
that orbit Jupiter, Io, Europa,
Ganymede, and Callisto.
And for a long time, that was it. These
just these four large objects seemed to
be in orbit round the giant planet.
And then along came the discovery of the
fifth one, the next largest of Jupiter's
many moons. The The number keeps going
up every time I look, we seem to have
found more of them, but this was the
fifth one to be discovered, and it was
found 280 years after Galileo
in 1892 by that man, E. E. Barnard,
there, Edward Emerson Barnard, using a
telescope that I've actually visited a
couple of times, the 36-in refracting
telescope, an absolutely magnificent
instrument up there on outside San
Francisco, and it's at the Lick
Observatory, named after James Lick, the
multi-millionaire that funded the
setting up of the observatory following
the gold rush.
That was the last moon to be found
purely visually.
After Amalthea, every other moon that
has been discovered has used photography
with long exposures.
Photography, of course, can delve much
deeper and fainter into the night sky,
seeing things that the eye just cannot
pick out, and so has rather become the
default way to do it uh since the very
late 1800s when photography was born. It
soon was adapted to astrophotography.
So, 1892, the discovery came along
and
it needed a name.
And the guy at the bottom right there,
Camille Flammarion,
professor in France, suggested the name
Amalthea because
this was one of the nymphs, and the
nymphs attended Zeus
uh to ensure that uh he was looked
after, so essentially providing nursing
services to the young
god Zeus.
Now, he suggested it fairly soon after
the discovery, but it wasn't until 1976
that the International Astronomical
Union, the IAU, finally got around to
approving the name.
I have picked up Amalthea
using astrophotography.
I have not seen it by the naked eye.
My skies
in and around Cambridge are not really
good enough to go all the way down to
magnitude 14,
especially in the glare and prox- imity
to the giant planet Jupiter, but with
amateur telescopes equipped with fairly
straightforward astrophotography
cameras, you can get past that. And
there's a composite picture there of
Jupiter
showing Io and Europa, two of the
Galilean moons,
rather a lot of glow round it, and the
tiny speck of Amalthea, Jupiter number
five, there. So, you can go and try and
pick that one up.
It orbits very close into Jupiter. You
can see that in the photograph.
Um here's a little map. We've got
Jupiter in the middle there and Amalthea
and a couple of the other small inner
moons.
So, just takes uh just under 12 hours,
11 hours and 54 minutes to complete one
lap at a distance of 113,000
mi from the center of Jupiter. There are
two other moons that even uh more
closely orbit Jupiter
uh in that inner little group there. And
you can see that there's a pattern of
rings and we'll say a bit more about
those in a moment.
Now,
when the Voyager spacecraft went out to
Jupiter, setting off in 1976,
getting to Jupiter in 1979,
they were able to take a couple of
images of this small potato-shaped moon.
We've got several of them here and we've
got some from the Galileo probe down at
the bottom left there, which are rather
more detailed. So, we've got a color one
and a black and white one from Voyager
and then four views from the Galileo
spacecraft um which was able to get up
close and had better technology cameras
anyway. So, managed to pick up the the
true elongated shape and even some of
the craters on the side there.
Here's a couple more pictures of those
craters.
You can see that it's vaguely round in
two of its dimensions and a bit
elongated in the other one, 250 km one
way and then 146 and 128 along the other
axes. And the long axis, the 250 km
axis, points down towards Jupiter.
Again, the effect of tidal locking
causing the uh
the center of mass and the long axis
of the uh moment of inertia to line up
with the central gravitational direction
down towards the giant planet.
Mass? Well, it's
quite small, but it's still 2 * 10 ^ 18
kg if you want it in uh
everyday units. Uh that's a lot less
than your typical
uh Earth's moon or Io or any of those
others, which are all many orders of
magnitude more than that.
But, this was enough that when the
Galileo probe was flown through the
Jupiter system, it was able to measure
the mass of Amalthea directly by the
deflection to the path of Galileo. And
the answer was uh
found to be a little higher than the
initial guess estimates that were just
based on how bright it was.
Very low density.
0.85 g per cubic centimeter. Less dense
than pure water. And it's likely that
this is a mixture of blocks of ice with
quite large voids, um gaps between them
in order that the density is coming out
at that uh lower figure there. So,
somewhat porous in nature.
And I got an artist's impression there
for you. Here's a real photograph though
that's been taken by a later spacecraft
that did manage to get some real detail
on the surface of Amalthea.
So, some quite substantial cratering.
Quite uh obviously made out of a number
of lumps that have stuck together. A
so-called contact binary or contact
multiple, and so accreted out of smaller
chunks
in the violence of the early solar
system.
And has been described as the reddest
object in the solar system, although
actually there are several objects that
have have that label applied to them, so
it's a little bit moot.
It's likely in this case that the color
is evaporated sulfur
coming from the moon Io, the most
volcanic moon in the solar system, and
spiraling down towards Jupiter and
coating Amalthea with the red and yellow
of sulfur and a few white bits as well.
Those colors all come from sulfur,
depending on the temperature of
crystallization and the speed of
crystallization
that the sulfur undergoes. You can get
those different colors there. So, it's
probably highly sulfurous.
And warmed by the sun and by heat from
Jupiter. Jupiter does still put out more
heat than it receives from the sun. So,
when we look at it, it is
warmer and emitting in the infrared than
you would expect. And that is not
because it's carrying out some weird
nuclear fusion in the center and is
really a star or anything. It's just
because it is still continuing to
differentiate.
The denser material materials are still
settling out downhill in the gravity
well inside Jupiter into the core and
the lighter materials bubbling up to the
top. And of course, if a heavy thing
moves downhill, it releases energy and
that eventually gets turned to heat. So,
its thermal
uh output is
from the uh
planet scale differentiation where the
density is pulling the more more dense
materials into the core and Amalthea is
on the receiving end of some of that
warming. Quite interesting that
that can be the case.
From the surface of Amalthea, Jupiter
would be truly enormous. Only 113,000
mi um from the center of Jupiter,
the surface of it visible from Amalthea
would span 45° of the sky
and because of that tidal locking, it
would stay in the same position
and would be incredibly bright, about
100 times the brightness of the full
moon as seen from the Earth. So, it
would be a truly spectacular sight,
although I wouldn't recommend going and
standing on the surface of Amalthea
because it's uh covered in sulfur and
exposed to enormous amounts of radiation
trapped in the magnetic field around
Jupiter. This is a fantastic shot
showing the detail of craters on craters
on craters on the surface. It's of
course that cratering is part of the
accretion process by which these things
get built in the first place and it
tends to be slightly more constructive
than destructive most of the time
leading to the objects getting bigger.
Being so small and so light, the surface
gravity, if you were to try and stand on
the surface of Amalthea,
uh would be pretty low.
It The force of gravity would be 1/500
the amount that we have on Earth, 1/500
of a G.
If you could move at 58 m/s,
you would pick up escape velocity and be
able to
get away from the gravity of Amalthea
and not come back. And that means you
could hit a golf ball into space. So,
there's a challenge for some budding
astronauts visiting the Jupiter system
to land on Amalthea and
take a drive
with a a golf club and put a ball out
into orbit or even lost forever, so it
never comes back.
Following up on the famous incident of
the golf clubs on the moon, of course.
Now, the extreme radiation environment
is also causing a lot of the lighter
materials to be
blasted off the surface and then the
molecules pick up enough velocity that
they get removed. They pick up that 58
m/s of
uh
kinetic movement of the molecules and so
they soon acquire escape velocity and
go off away from Amalthea. Presumably,
they'll get
pulled into orbit round Jupiter and may
end up landing upon Jupiter, but
certainly this results in a very very
dry environment with none of the
volatile materials left on the surface
and certainly no atmosphere.
In the process, though, all of the dust
and fragments go into orbit around the
giant planet and they build rings.
And we have a number of these rings. We
have the Amalthea gossamer ring, which
starts at Amalthea and spirals inwards
towards Jupiter.
The other moons there, Metis and Thebe,
also have
rings associated with them through much
the same
process, whereby
material is blasted from the surface of
the moonlets and goes in to make these
very thin rings.
Now, the Galileo probe, when it was in
action at Jupiter, took photographs,
including the one of Amalthea that you
see there,
and it detected, not just that these
rings were present, but that there were
several small moonlets
in and around the Amalthea orbit.
And it may well be that these are
fragments
of substantial size that have been
blasted from Amalthea by impact events.
So, it could well be that these rings
are not just formed of
dust and gas, but actually contain
significant sized fragments as well.
Something for us to try and investigate
with future missions.
And it does sort of point to the origin
of Amalthea.
It was probably not formed where it is.
In the early days of the solar system,
Jupiter would have been very, very much
hotter than it is now. It's cooling,
continuously radiating heat to space,
generating that heat by differentiating
internally, as I described, and it would
have been doing even more of that in the
past, and would have been even hotter.
Plus, a lot of space junk would have
been hitting it and dumping its kinetic
energy into it, so raising the
temperature further.
And so, in the region of Amalthea's
orbit,
the
temperature would have been way too hot
for any icy bodies to have
formed. They would have been melted and
vaporized by the heat of Jupiter in this
region. So, it's got to have come from
somewhere else.
And the question is, did it migrate
inwards
by some gravitational tug-of-war with
the other moons perhaps and end up
spiraling into its present position or
was it captured
as a passing
asteroid just got captured into this
orbit as a result of a near miss with
one of the moons or something and ended
up in this particular path. And that
seems quite likely because it's somewhat
reminiscent of objects called Centaurs
which are
similar irregular shaped
objects that uh
fly around the outer part of the solar
system. So, there's a possibility that
Amalthea is actually a captured Centaur.
And I'm going to leave you with a couple
of other further images. Here's one that
the James Webb Space Telescope took.
James Webb looking in the infrared makes
Jupiter look this strange blue color in
this image with the Great Red Spot
appearing as that bluish-white bit on
the right-hand side.
You've got the uh
image of Amalthea as the bright white
dot
in the middle of the ring over to the
left-hand side of the image. There's a
couple of stars, one above it and one
below it in the image. And then the
inner moon um Metis with the uh brighter
ring is also visible there halfway
between Amalthea and the body of
Jupiter, but it's a fantastically
detailed picture and just shows the
power that uh the James Webb can uh roll
out when it wants to.
Arthur C. Clarke mentions Jupiter 5. He
has this book from 1953
talking about an ancient alien spaceship
orbiting Jupiter and
humanity's attempt to
make use of it or abuse it.
And it's a great read if you're
interested.
So Jupiter 5 the same code name as
Amalthea would have. And I'll just leave
you with one further picture of a little
tiny black dot of Amalthea's shadow
there passing across the face of the
Great Red Spot on Jupiter. So thanks
very much for listening and that was
once around Amalthea.